.. -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
    (c) Crown copyright Met Office. All rights reserved.
    The file LICENCE, distributed with this code, contains details of the terms
    under which the code may be used.
   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _hello_world:

Hello World (Skeleton)
======================

This tutorial is designed to show how to run a simple LFRic application. It is
not intended to be a complete tutorial on how to write an application, but
rather to show how to run an application that is already written.

The application is a simple skeleton that does not do anything useful, but is
designed as a demonstration and test of the basic infrastructure required to run
LFRic applications.

Here it is used to show you how to build and run an application and to enable
you to test that you have the necessary software installed and configured
correctly to run LFRic in it's most basic form.

The application is located in the LFRic core repository at
:code:`applications/skeleton`.

Once you have cloned the LFRic core repository and set up your environment with
the required dependencies as described in the :ref:`software dependencies`
section of the installation guide, you should be able to build and run the
application with the following commands.

.. dropdown:: Info
    :color: info
    :icon: info

    The application used in this example does not do any IO and so does not link
    to the IO library XIOS.

.. code-block:: bash

   cd applications/skeleton
   make build

.. dropdown:: Attention
    :color: warning
    :icon: info

    The build command for applications in the lfric_apps repository is
    different. Please see the lfric_apps
    :doc:`build instructions<lfric_apps:developer_guide/local_builds>` for details.

This will build the application and place the executable in the bin directory.
the build command also creates a working directory where all the source code is
copied and the different steps required in the build are completed. For example,
both the PSy layer, generated by PSyclone, and the configuration source code
generated from the Rose metadata can be found in the working directory.

The application can then be run with the canned example with the following
command.

.. code-block:: bash

   cd example
   ../bin/skeleton configuration.nml

This will run the application with the configuration file provided in the
example directory.

Upon completion of the run the output will finish with the following message.

.. code-block:: text

   20260604105713.475+0100:INFO : skeleton application completed.

If you look back through the output you will see that the application has
printed out information at each time step it is running like this:

.. code-block:: text

   20260604105713.469+0100:S3:INFO : skeleton: Running algorithm
   20260604105713.470+0100:S3:INFO : Min/max field_1 =   0.00000000E+00  0.00000000E+00
   20260604105713.470+0100:S3:INFO : skeleton: finished algorithm

The first part of each line is a date and time stamp, followed by the time step
number (e.g. S3). The final part of the message prefix is the log level (INFO
in this case) and then the message itself as defined in the source code. The
messages are printed by the application at different stages of the run to show
what it is doing. In this case, it is showing that it is running an algorithm,
printing out the minimum and maximum values of a field before finishing.
